Document InfluxDB I/O procedures (#75)
crate/cratedb-guide: docs/integrate/etl/influxdb.md

(influxdb-import)=
# Import data from InfluxDB

> In this quick tutorial we use [influxio](https://github.com/daq-tools/influxio)
> to import data from InfluxDB into CrateDB. It can be used both as a standalone
> program, and as a library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this quick tutorial we use the InfluxDB I/O subsystem of CrateDB Toolkit
to import data from InfluxDB into CrateDB.
```

> :::{note}
> Please note that influxio is alpha-quality software, and a work in progress.
> Contributions of all kinds are very welcome, in order to make it more solid. 
> Breaking changes should be expected until a 1.0 release, so version pinning is
> recommended, especially when you use it as a library.
> :::
> 

Reviewer: This remark is not applicable for a general documention. Please delete.

```suggestion
```

(setup-influxio)=
## Setup

`influxio` can be installed with pip:

:::{code} console
pip install influxio
:::

You will also need the [cratedb-toolkit](https://github.com/crate-workbench/cratedb-toolkit/tree/main/cratedb_toolkit/io#installation)
to load the data into your CrateDB instance. It can be installed with:

:::{code} console
pip install --upgrade 'cratedb-toolkit[all]'

> :::

Reviewer: When aiming to use CrateDB Toolkit, installing `influxio` separately is not needed. The right installation command would be `pip install 'cratedb-toolkit[influxdb]'`.

In general, in the main section of the article, I would omit all details about influxio, and only present the corresponding CLI command of CrateDB Toolkit.

At the end of the article, I would link to the documentation of influxio, conveying the message that it offers a few more commands which help in different scenarios like the one you've picked.

Reviewer: Currently, there is no `pip install` command inside. When aiming for conveying that tutorial "the Docker way", like proposed at https://github.com/crate/cratedb-guide/pull/75#issuecomment-2099100756, we will probably not need any of those. JFYI.

> 

Reviewer: It may be sensible to add a "start services" section here, which conveys how to run both services using Docker. We can't present it for each and every platform, so Docker just yields the best platform coverage.

(setup-influxdb)=
### InfluxDB setup

The following InfluxDB setup will be used in this tutorial:

:::{code} console
influx setup \
  --username user1 \
  --password 49jk8FQB$]1 \
  --token token123 \
  --org example \
  --bucket testdrive \
  --force

> :::

Reviewer: That command would fail when no InfluxDB service is running.

Reviewer: You can find corresponding commands to start the services using Docker on https://influxio.readthedocs.io/development.html.

With the following sample data loaded in InfluxDB:

:::{code} console
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=27.4,humidity=92.3,windspeed=4.5 1588363200"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=28.2,humidity=88.7,windspeed=4.7 1588549600"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=27.9,humidity=91.6,windspeed=3.2 1588736000"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=29.1,humidity=88.1,windspeed=2.4 1588922400"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=28.6,humidity=93.4,windspeed=2.9 1589108800"
:::

(export-data)=
### Export

Now you can export the data into CrateDB:

:::{code} console
export CRATEDB_SQLALCHEMY_URL=crate://crate@localhost:4200/testdrive/demo
ctk load table influxdb2://example:token123@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo

> :::

Reviewer: That command would fail when no CrateDB service is running.

Reviewer: You can find corresponding commands to start the services using Docker on https://influxio.readthedocs.io/development.html.

    influxio copy \
        "testdata://dateindex/?rows=42" \
        "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo"

    # With selected amount of rows and columns (only supported by certain test data sources).
    influxio copy \
        "testdata://wide/?rows=42&columns=42" \
        "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo"

    # From line protocol file to InfluxDB API.
    influxio copy \
        "file://tests/testdata/basic.lp" \
        "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo"

    # From line protocol file to InfluxDB API.
    influxio copy \
        "https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb2-sample-data/raw/master/air-sensor-data/air-sensor-data.lp" \
        "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo"

    # From line protocol file to any database supported by SQLAlchemy.
    influxio copy \
        "file://export.lp" \
        "sqlite://export.sqlite?table=export"
:::

(cmd-export-from-api)=
### Export from api

:::{code} console
    # From API to database file.
    influxio copy \
        "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo" \
        "sqlite:///export.sqlite?table=demo"

    # From API to database server.

>     influxio copy \
>         "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo" \
>         "crate://crate@localhost:4200/testdrive?table=demo"
> 
>     # From API to line protocol file.
>     influxio copy \
>         "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo" \
>         "file://export.lp"
> 
>     # From API to line protocol on stdout.
>     influxio copy \
>         "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo" \
>         "file://-?format=lp"
> :::
> 
> (cmd-export-from-data-dir)=
> ### Export from data directory
> 
> :::{code} console
>     # From InfluxDB data directory to line protocol file.
>     influxio copy \
>         "file:///path/to/influxdb/engine?bucket-id=372d1908eab801a6&measurement=demo" \
>         "file://export.lp"
> 
>     # From InfluxDB data directory to line protocol file, compressed with gzip.
>     influxio copy \
>         "file:///path/to/influxdb/engine?bucket-id=372d1908eab801a6&measurement=demo" \
>         "file://export.lp.gz"
> 
>     # From InfluxDB data directory to line protocol on stdout.
>     influxio copy \
>         "file:///path/to/influxdb/engine?bucket-id=372d1908eab801a6&measurement=demo" \
>         ""file://-?format=lp"
> :::
> 
> (cmd-oci)=
> ### OCI 
> 
> OCI images are available on the GitHub Container Registry (GHCR).
> In order to run them on Podman or Docker, invoke:
> 
> :::{code} console
> docker run --rm --network=host ghcr.io/daq-tools/influxio \
>     influxio copy \
>     "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo" \
>     "stdout://export.lp"
> :::
> 
> If you want to work with files on your filesystem, you will need to either
> mount the working directory into the container using the --volume option,
> or use the --interactive option to consume STDIN, like:
> 
> :::{code} console
> docker run --rm --volume=$(pwd):/data ghcr.io/daq-tools/influxio \
>     influxio copy "file:///data/export.lp" "sqlite:///data/export.sqlite?table=export"
> 
> cat export.lp | \
> docker run --rm --interactive --network=host ghcr.io/daq-tools/influxio \
>     influxio copy "stdin://?format=lp" "crate://crate@localhost:4200/testdrive/export"
> :::

Reviewer: It does not make sense to copy that README-level documentation into another repository. It will only get stale too quickly. Please just link to it.

```suggestion
```

(integrate-influxdb)=
(import-influxdb)=
# Import data from InfluxDB

In this quick tutorial we use the InfluxDB I/O subsystem of CrateDB Toolkit
to import data from InfluxDB into CrateDB.

(integrate-influxdb-quickstart)=
## Quickstart

There are multiple ways to get and use the this tool, to avoid 
unnecessary installations we will use Docker to run the services.
**Docker is needed for this:**

:::{code} console
docker run --rm --network=host ghcr.io/daq-tools/influxio \
    influxio copy \
    "http://example:token@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo" \
    "crate://crate@localhost:4200/testdrive/demo"
:::

(setup-influxdb)=
### InfluxDB setup

Following is an example configuration of InfluxDB and some sample data
should you need it. **Prerequisite for these to work is a running 
instance of InfluxDB.**

Initial InfluxDB configuration:

:::{code} console
influx setup \
  --username user1 \
  --password 49jk8FQB$]1 \
  --token token123 \
  --org example \
  --bucket testdrive \
  --force

> :::

Reviewer: Bonus: Also run `influx` through a corresponding OCI image.

Write sample data to InfluxDB:

:::{code} console
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=27.4,humidity=92.3,windspeed=4.5 1588363200"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=28.2,humidity=88.7,windspeed=4.7 1588549600"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=27.9,humidity=91.6,windspeed=3.2 1588736000"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=29.1,humidity=88.1,windspeed=2.4 1588922400"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=28.6,humidity=93.4,windspeed=2.9 1589108800"

> :::

Reviewer: Dito.

(export-data)=
### Export

Now you can export the data into CrateDB. **Prerequisite for these to work
is a running instance of CrateDB.**

:::{code} console
export CRATEDB_SQLALCHEMY_URL=crate://crate@localhost:4200/testdrive/demo
ctk load table influxdb2://example:token123@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo

> :::

Reviewer: Bonus / Subsequent iteration: CrateDB Toolkit is also available per OCI image.

And verify that data is indeed in your CrateDB cluster:

:::{code} console
crash --command "SELECT * FROM testdrive.demo;"

> :::

Reviewer: I think the image also includes `crash` out of the box.

> (cratedb-toolkit)=
> ## Setup
> 
> There are many more ways to get and use the CrateDB Toolkit. To see all
> that's possible with it, please visit the 
> [cratedb-toolkit repository](https://github.com/crate-workbench/cratedb-toolkit/tree/main/cratedb_toolkit/io)

Reviewer: This section should not grab the link label `cratedb-toolkit`, because there will be a dedicated page about it. I don't think it will need a dedicated link label at all. Also adding a wording suggestion, and another sentence about influxio.

```suggestion
## More information

There are many more ways to apply the I/O subsystem of CrateDB Toolkit as pipeline
elements in your daily data operations routines. Please visit the [CrateDB Toolkit I/O
Documentation], to learn more about what's possible.

The InfluxDB I/O subsystem is based on the [influxio] package. Please also check its
documentation to learn about more of its capabilities, supporting you when working
with InfluxDB.

[influxio]: https://github.com/daq-tools/influxio
[CrateDB Toolkit I/O Documentation]: https://github.com/crate-workbench/cratedb-toolkit/tree/main/cratedb_toolkit/io
```

influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=29.1,humidity=88.1,windspeed=2.4 1588922400"
influx write --bucket=testdrive --org=example --precision=s "demo,region=amazonas temperature=28.6,humidity=93.4,windspeed=2.9 1589108800"
:::

(export-data)=
### Export

Now you can export the data into CrateDB. **Prerequisite for these to work
is a running instance of CrateDB.**

:::{code} console
export CRATEDB_SQLALCHEMY_URL=crate://crate@localhost:4200/testdrive/demo
ctk load table influxdb2://example:token123@localhost:8086/testdrive/demo
:::

And verify that data is indeed in your CrateDB cluster:

:::{code} console
crash --command "SELECT * FROM testdrive.demo;"
:::

## More information

There are many more ways to apply the I/O subsystem of CrateDB Toolkit as pipeline
elements in your daily data operations routines. Please visit the [CrateDB Toolkit I/O
Documentation], to learn more about what's possible.

The InfluxDB I/O subsystem is based on the [influxio] package. Please also check its
documentation to learn about more of its capabilities, supporting you when working
with InfluxDB.

> [influxio]: https://github.com/daq-tools/influxio
> [CrateDB Toolkit I/O Documentation]: https://github.com/crate-workbench/cratedb-toolkit/tree/main/cratedb_toolkit/io

Reviewer: Both projects now have a proper documentation, so we don't need to change it later.

```suggestion
[influxio]: https://influxio.readthedocs.io/
[CrateDB Toolkit I/O Documentation]: https://cratedb-toolkit.readthedocs.io/io/influxdb/loader.html
```
